Docs updates (#9830)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/commands/cmd-docs.md

> <VersionBlock firstVersion="2.0">

Reviewer: The links below lead to [this page](https://docs-getdbt-com-git-docs-v2-dbt-labs.vercel.app/docs/build/view-documentation?version=2#dbt-docs-v2) which still marks dbt Docs v2 with alpha pills:

<img width="694" height="216" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/31e8aa39-12af-424c-8d74-03a81d4a0daa" />

<img width="389" height="80" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/92caa588-9b49-44b7-8487-fbb82508f2fc" />

With the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> and <Constant name="core_v2" />, [dbt Docs v2](/docs/build/view-documentation#dbt-docs-v2) is the recommended way to generate and view your project's documentation. Use `dbt docs generate` to build the documentation site and `dbt docs serve` to preview it locally.

If you only need to hydrate catalog metadata (`catalog.json`) for <Constant name="catalog" /> in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />, without building the documentation site, use the [`--write-catalog` flag](#--write-catalog-flag) instead.

## dbt Docs v2 <Lifecycle status="beta"/>

> Instead of loading a static `manifest.json` in the browser, v2 builds a compact binary index of your project. `dbt docs generate` exports a documentation site made of plain static files (a single-page app plus the index artifacts) that any file host can serve. The browser reads those artifacts directly using DuckDB-WASM, so you don't need to run a stateful server to view your docs. This keeps the experience fast even for large projects.

Reviewer: Can we link to something that explains DuckDB-WASM? Or at least spell out WASM for those of us who don't know it stands for WebAssembly.

### Generate the site

`dbt docs generate` compiles your project, writes the index, and exports the documentation site in a single command. You no longer need to run a separate `--write-index` command first:

```shell
dbt docs generate
```

> By default, dbt writes the site into your `target/` directory (`target/index.html`, `target/assets/`, and the index under `target/index/`), matching the layout of <Constant name="core_v1" />. You can serve `index.html` from `target/` the same way you did in v1, so existing CI such as `dbt docs generate && mv target public` continues to work.

Reviewer: > matching the layout of <Constant name="core_v1" />

Do you mean Docs v1?

Author: v1 in this case is referring to Core v1 but they're sort of synonymous at this stage

Use `--output-dir` to write a self-contained copy of the site to a different directory:

```shell

> dbt docs generate --output-dir site

Reviewer: I wonder if `site` should say `directory` so it's clear that it represents the output directory?

Author: Added an explanation after so it's clear

```

> To skip compilation and export whatever index is already on disk, use `--no-compile`. This errors if no index exists:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To skip compilation and export whatever index is already on disk, use `--no-compile`, which fails with an error if no index exists:
```

dbt Docs v2 renders your project's `__overview__` doc block as the landing page, the same as dbt Docs v1. dbt discovers overview content by scanning your `docs-paths` for `{% docs %}` blocks, so a block in `models/overview.md` is found by default. A file at `docs/overview.md` is only picked up when your project sets `docs-paths: ["docs"]`. If your project defines no overview, dbt renders its default overview content.

## --write-catalog flag

The `--write-catalog` flag generates the [`catalog.json`](/reference/artifacts/catalog-json) artifact, which contains metadata about the tables and <Term id="view">views</Term> produced by the models in your project. It focuses solely on metadata hydration and does not build the documentation site — use [dbt Docs v2](#dbt-docs-v2) for that.

For <Constant name="fusion" /> jobs running in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />, dbt automatically runs `write-catalog` with `build` and `run` and hydrates your Catalog, so you don't need to include it manually. You can use this flag with the following commands:

- `dbt build`
- `dbt run`
- `dbt parse`
- `dbt compile`

**Example**:

```shell
dbt build --write-catalog
```

### Platform behavior

> In <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> jobs running on <Constant name="fusion" />, you don't need to change anything. When `dbt docs generate` is called (either as a job step or separate command), the platform automatically uses `--write-catalog` instead. Additionally, for <Constant name="fusion" /> jobs running in the platform, dbt runs `write-catalog` automatically with `build` or `run`, so you don't need to run a separate command to hydrate your metadata. In the platform, you can optionally choose to include it when running `dbt parse` or `dbt compile`.

Reviewer: > the platform automatically uses `--write-catalog` instead.

Instead of generating the docs site? I'm confused because I thought `--write-catalog`  "focuses solely on metadata hydration and does not build the documentation site" But I also thought `docs generate` builds the docs v2 site in dbt platform?

Author: @eliasdefaria good question here. ARe the changes you've made explicitly for the local experience? Does anything change platform side?

Reviewer 2: Platform side should just work if you run docs generate or turn it on in your jobs. Otherwise it does not produce the static site

<VersionBlock firstVersion="2.0">

With the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> and <Constant name="core_v2" />, [dbt Docs v2](/docs/build/view-documentation#dbt-docs-v2) is the recommended way to generate and view your project's documentation. Use `dbt docs generate` to build the documentation site and `dbt docs serve` to preview it locally.

If you only need to hydrate catalog metadata (`catalog.json`) for <Constant name="catalog" /> in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />, without building the documentation site, use the [`--write-catalog` flag](#--write-catalog-flag) instead.

## dbt Docs v2 <Lifecycle status="beta"/>

> Instead of loading a static `manifest.json` in the browser, v2 builds a compact binary index of your project. `dbt docs generate` exports a documentation site made of plain static files (a single-page app plus the index artifacts) that any file host can serve. The browser reads those artifacts directly using DuckDB-WASM, so you don't need to run a stateful server to view your docs. This keeps the experience fast even for large projects.

Reviewer 2: Again no company binary index. It just produces the parquet artifacts instead of manifest json
